<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>13.5 Transcription in Archaea Is More Similar to Transcription in Eukaryotes Than to Transcription in Bacteria in Chapter 13 Transcription</title>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="final" name="process"/>
<meta content="3.1" name="schema"/>
<link href="../styles/pie_9781319216801.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1df703a4-880e-4fb4-a16f-bd0ab0744194" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body class="bodymatter" epub:type="bodymatter">
<section class="sect1" id="ben_9781319297145_xIiIlcD5qS">
<header id="ben_9781319297145_aOGfwp8p19"><h2 class="a-head v2" id="ben_9781319297145_QYvl32xodC"><span aria-label="397" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page397" role="doc-pagebreak" title="397"/><span class="ordinal" epub:type="ordinal" id="ben_9781319297145_zFBqmQWTYV">13.5 </span>Transcription in Archaea Is More Similar to Transcription in Eukaryotes Than to Transcription in Bacteria</h2></header>
<p class="noindent" id="ben_9781319297145_JqV6ak1gwE">Some 2 billion to 3 billion years ago, life diverged into three lines of evolutionary descent: the bacteria (also called eubacteria), the archaea, and the eukaryotes (see <a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch02_01.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_lpPoBBElt3" id="ben_9781319297145_tBQJ49NweT">Chapter 2</a>). Although bacteria and archaea are superficially similar—both are unicellular and lack a nucleus—the results of studies of their DNA sequences and other biochemical properties indicate that they are as distantly related to each other as they are to eukaryotes. The evolutionary distinctions between archaea, bacteria, and eukaryotes are clear. But did eukaryotes first diverge from an ancestral prokaryote, with a later separation of prokaryotes into bacteria and archaea, or did the archaea and the bacteria split first, with the eukaryotes later evolving from one of these groups?</p>
<p class="indent" id="ben_9781319297145_eOroT4NQsg">Studies of transcription in bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes have yielded important clues to the evolutionary relationships between these organisms. Archaea, like bacteria, have a single RNA polymerase, but this enzyme is most similar to the RNA polymerases of eukaryotes. As discussed earlier, bacterial RNA polymerase consists of 5 subunits, whereas eukaryotic RNA polymerases are much more complex; RNA polymerase II, for example, is composed of 12 subunits. Archaeal RNA polymerase is similarly complex, with 11 or more subunits. Furthermore, the amino acid sequence of archaeal RNA polymerase is similar to that of eukaryotic RNA polymerase II.</p>
<p class="indent" id="ben_9781319297145_2O1F00CYLi">Archaeal promoters contain a consensus sequence similar to the TATA box found in eukaryotic promoters. The archaeal TATA box is found approximately 27 bp upstream of the transcription start site and helps to determine the location of the transcription start site, as it does in eukaryotes. Archaea possess a TATA-binding protein (TBP), which is a critical transcription factor for all three of the eukaryotic polymerases but not for bacterial RNA polymerase. TBP binds the TATA box in archaea with the help of another transcription factor, TFIIB, which is also found in eukaryotes but not in bacteria. However, some other regulators of transcription found in archaea are more similar to those found in bacteria, so transcription in archaea is not entirely eukaryotic in nature. As prokaryotes, archaea lack a nuclear membrane, but many species do produce histone proteins, which help compact the DNA and form nucleosome-like structures.</p>
<p class="indent" id="ben_9781319297145_AQs8IypsVN">Thus, transcription, one of the most basic of life processes, has strong similarities in eukaryotes and archaea, suggesting that these two groups are more closely related to each other than either is to bacteria. This conclusion is supported by other data, including those obtained from a comparison of gene sequences.</p>
<aside class="case-study c3 main-flow v4" epub:type="case-study" id="ben_9781319297145_CZfEguy6MF" title="CONCEPTS">
<header id="ben_9781319297145_7LoQce9KiD"><h3 class="title cap v4" epub:type="title" id="ben_9781319297145_7olvTXVTfV">Concepts</h3></header>
<p class="noindent" id="ben_9781319297145_fUvfdD9WY5">The process of transcription in archaea has many similarities to transcription in eukaryotes.</p>
</aside>
</section>
</body>
</html>