<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>14.6 Long Noncoding RNAs Regulate Gene Expression in Chapter 14 RNA Molecules and RNA Processing</title>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="final" name="process"/>
<meta content="3.1" name="schema"/>
<link href="../styles/pie_9781319216801.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1df703a4-880e-4fb4-a16f-bd0ab0744194" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body class="bodymatter" epub:type="bodymatter">
<section class="sect1" id="ben_9781319297145_DrcJ8Vz8XH">
<header id="ben_9781319297145_4vr7GjGYOd"><h2 class="a-head v2" id="ben_9781319297145_tDqvjoxT9q"><span class="ordinal" epub:type="ordinal" id="ben_9781319297145_Q2BQ3v08Da"><span aria-label="427" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page427" role="doc-pagebreak" title="427"/>14.6 </span>Long Noncoding RNAs Regulate Gene Expression</h2></header>
<p class="noindent" id="ben_9781319297145_vyCo2xKR0V">For many years, our knowledge of RNA was limited to those molecules that play a central role in the synthesis of proteins: mRNAs, tRNAs, and rRNAs. Later, small nuclear RNAs that participate in the posttranscriptional processing of RNA (snRNAs and snoRNAs) were added to the list. Starting in the late 1990s, geneticists began to recognize that numerous small RNAs (siRNAs, miRNAs, piRNAs, and crRNAs) were also abundant and fundamentally important to cell function. More recently, it has become apparent that much of the eukaryotic genome is transcribed—although only about 1% of the human genome, for example, directly encodes proteins, the majority of DNA nucleotides are transcribed, producing many long RNA molecules that do not encode proteins. Called 
<dfn class="keyword" epub:type="keyword" id="ben_9781319297145_DBJyhzAg0j"><a class="glossref" epub:type="glossref" href="pie_9781319216801_BM_glossary.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_Ba0ND4zpQF" id="ben_9781319297145_Xfz6qCtbDL" role="doc-glossref">long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs)</a></dfn>, these RNAs are typically over 200 nucleotides in length and can be as many as 100,000 nucleotides long. They lack an open reading frame—a sequence with a start and a stop codon that is translated into a protein. Thousands of lncRNAs have been discovered. It is estimated that the human genome generates more than 20,000 different lncRNAs. The DNA sequences that encode them, along with other DNA of unknown function, have been called “the dark matter of the genome.”</p>
<p class="indent" id="ben_9781319297145_T7UehuAB3l">There is currently much debate about whether most lncRNAs are functionally important or simply represent “transcriptional noise”—the products of frequent, imprecise transcription. Although the function of many lncRNAs is still unclear, there is increasing evidence that at least some play a role in controlling gene expression. Some lncRNAs interact with proteins that regulate transcription. For example, an lncRNA called lincRNA-p21 interacts with a protein called p53, a transcription factor that activates numerous genes, including genes involved in control of the cell cycle, cell death, and other cellular functions. By repressing p53, lincRNA-p21 affects the transcription of hundreds of genes. Other lncRNAs modify chromatin structure, which also regulates transcription (see <a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch17_01.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_5lnSPYWvZw" id="ben_9781319297145_dgsNmPSC83">Chapter 17</a>).</p>
<p class="indent" id="ben_9781319297145_ukITMPz5yZ"><span aria-label="428" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page428" role="doc-pagebreak" title="428"/>Some lncRNAs have binding sites for proteins or miRNAs that interact with mRNAs; in these cases, the lncRNAs serve as decoys for their attachment, thereby limiting the numbers of miRNAs or proteins that are available to bind to mRNAs. For example, an lncRNA called NORAD (for <i class="semantic-i" id="ben_9781319297145_D9OPC6g5Qm">no</i>ncoding <i class="semantic-i" id="ben_9781319297145_zzNfGgnlka">R</i>NA <i class="semantic-i" id="ben_9781319297145_jrC9R8ZA11">a</i>ctivated by DNA <i class="semantic-i" id="ben_9781319297145_v5DDhD2cLQ">d</i>amage), which is present in hundreds of copies in most mammalian cells, is important in maintaining chromosome stability. NORAD has multiple binding sites for PUMILIO proteins, which bind to and repress the stability and translation of mRNAs involved in mitosis, DNA repair, and DNA replication. The NORAD lncRNAs normally sequester PUMILIO proteins so that they are not available to bind to mRNA and repress these processes. Researchers have found that inactivation of NORAD lncRNA leads to an increase in PUMILIO proteins, causing chromosome instability and aneuploidy. Thus, the NORAD lncRNA plays an essential role in maintaining chromosome stability in mammalian cells by serving as a decoy for PUMILIO proteins.</p>
<p class="indent" id="ben_9781319297145_9nll4v63N6">One of the best-studied lncRNAs is <i class="semantic-i" id="ben_9781319297145_2NlXgM6ey3">Xist</i> RNA, which plays a central role in dosage compensation in mammalian cells (described in <a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch04_01.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_EWKADqCEc2" id="ben_9781319297145_GfEpr3vKxD">Chapter 4</a>). To balance the expression of autosomal genes and X-linked genes in males (with one X chromosome) and females (with two X chromosomes), one of the X chromosomes in each mammalian female cell is inactivated. Which X chromosome is inactivated is random and is determined early in development; once inactivated, this chromosome remains inactive through multiple rounds of cell division. <i class="semantic-i" id="ben_9781319297145_OKa3BwFRFV">Xist</i> RNA is transcribed only from the X chromosome destined to become inactive; the <i class="semantic-i" id="ben_9781319297145_CwnvzijfW5">Xist</i> RNA coats that chromosome and recruits proteins that methylate histones in the chromatin. Methylation of the chromatin inhibits the transcription of genes on the inactive X chromosome. At least two additional lncRNAs act to regulate the expression of <i class="semantic-i" id="ben_9781319297145_6oehJtiwtA">Xist</i> RNA.</p>
<p class="indent" id="ben_9781319297145_zW5JRScRVj">Still other lncRNAs are complementary to mRNA sequences and function by base pairing with those mRNAs and preventing their translation or splicing. Evidence suggests that some lncRNAs bring about genomic imprinting (see <a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch04_01.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_EWKADqCEc2" id="ben_9781319297145_HP9c1KrJpJ">Chapters 4</a> and <a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch21_01.xhtml" id="ben_9781319297145_jQn1605tTI">21</a>). Imprinting occurs when a gene is expressed differently depending on whether it is inherited from the male or the female parent. Many clusters of imprinted genes contain sequences that encode lncRNAs, and evidence suggests that some imprinted genes are controlled by lncRNAs.</p>
<p class="indent" id="ben_9781319297145_NIXEWf0ddh">Noncoding RNAs called 
<dfn class="keyword" epub:type="keyword" id="ben_9781319297145_F2TdXROBPz"><a class="glossref" epub:type="glossref" href="pie_9781319216801_BM_glossary.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_rY97Wtev5r" id="ben_9781319297145_B9HkRj9Ddr" role="doc-glossref">enhancer RNAs (eRNAs)</a></dfn> are transcribed from enhancer sequences and may play a role in regulating the expression of protein-encoding genes, perhaps by facilitating the looping of DNA between enhancers and promoters (see <a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch13_01.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_KBBmwjHUS4" id="ben_9781319297145_mjxN5zr5Pm">Chapter 13</a>). Another recently discovered group of noncoding RNAs consists of 
<dfn class="keyword" epub:type="keyword" id="ben_9781319297145_jN5IDRwJEO"><a class="glossref" epub:type="glossref" href="pie_9781319216801_BM_glossary.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_wPSoPQj25I" id="ben_9781319297145_L3dUGeAdmd" role="doc-glossref">circular RNAs (circRNAs)</a></dfn>. Large numbers of these RNAs accumulate in cells, probably because their circular nature makes them resistant to the action of enzymes that normally degrade linear RNA molecules at their 5<sup class="semantic-sup" id="ben_9781319297145_FWAmuW4FIY">′</sup> or 3<sup class="semantic-sup" id="ben_9781319297145_0jm3QoDygz">′</sup> ends. Many of these circular noncoding RNAs are thought to arise through errors in splicing in which, for example, the 5<sup class="semantic-sup" id="ben_9781319297145_mZzYfSFdHr">′</sup> end of an exon is erroneously joined to the 3<sup class="semantic-sup" id="ben_9781319297145_yNicgWNjNh">′</sup> end of the same exon. A few circRNAs contain numerous binding sites for miRNAs. Like the lncRNAs mentioned earlier, these RNAs can serve as decoys for miRNAs, preventing the miRNAs from attaching to and inhibiting the translation of mRNAs. Other circRNAs contain sequences that code for proteins and appear to be translated. However, the function of most circRNAs, if they indeed have a function, is unknown.</p>
<aside class="case-study c3 main-flow v4" epub:type="case-study" id="ben_9781319297145_mqBfo2hJDS" title="CONCEPTS">
<header id="ben_9781319297145_aCwnrgXbHc"><h3 class="title cap v4" epub:type="title" id="ben_9781319297145_QryQZMBKnt">Concepts</h3></header>
<p class="noindent" id="ben_9781319297145_aUlzNwYTaN">Long noncoding RNAs are long RNA molecules that do not encode proteins. Evidence increasingly suggests that many of these molecules function in the control of gene expression. Enhancer RNAs are transcribed from enhancers and also play a role in control of gene expression. Circular noncoding RNAs, which are numerous in some cells, may serve as decoys for miRNAs.</p>
</aside>
</section>
</body>
</html>