<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>21.5 The Epigenome in Chapter 21 Epigenetics</title>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="final" name="process"/>
<meta content="3.1" name="schema"/>
<link href="../styles/pie_9781319216801.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1df703a4-880e-4fb4-a16f-bd0ab0744194" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body class="bodymatter" epub:type="bodymatter">
<section class="sect1" id="ben_9781319297145_u4P14r77vm">
<header id="ben_9781319297145_RQDjgDjs09"><h2 class="a-head v2" id="ben_9781319297145_IxelGGpaXY"><span aria-label="667" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page667" role="doc-pagebreak" title="667"/><span class="ordinal" epub:type="ordinal" id="ben_9781319297145_FDUcj7becL">21.5 </span>The Epigenome</h2></header>
<p class="noindent" id="ben_9781319297145_1jcokSrIUn">In 2003, researchers declared that essentially the entire human genome had been sequenced. This monumental achievement provided a wealth of information about how genetic information is encoded within the genome. Yet the DNA base sequence is only a partial record of heritable information. As we have discussed, additional epigenetic information is contained within chromatin structure—information that is heritable and that affects how the DNA base sequence is expressed. The overall pattern of chromatin modifications in a genome has been termed the 
<dfn class="keyword" epub:type="keyword" id="ben_9781319297145_l1dh4wp4UY"><a class="glossref" epub:type="glossref" href="pie_9781319216801_BM_glossary.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_UoqU3U2i8C" id="ben_9781319297145_CwK7hNw0AJ" role="doc-glossref">epigenome</a></dfn>. Researchers have now described epigenetic modifications across the genome.</p>
<section class="sect3" id="ben_9781319297145_1EQPHZVqAn">
<header id="ben_9781319297145_PgQ9ceZdHn"><h3 class="c-head cap v2" id="ben_9781319297145_hHTOI58EH6">Genome-Wide Epigenetic Marks</h3></header>
<p class="noindent" id="ben_9781319297145_V0IKVhLY9F">Using the techniques we described earlier (methylation-sensitive endonucleases, bisulfite sequencing, and chromatin immunoprecipitation), geneticists have compared the epigenomes of different types of cells. For example, researchers determined the distribution of 5-methylcytosine across the entire genome in two cell types: (1) an undifferentiated human stem cell and (2) a fibroblast. The researchers found widespread differences in the methylation patterns of these cells. The finding that patterns of DNA methylation vary among cell types supports the idea that cytosine methylation provides the means by which cell types stably maintain their differences during development. Other researchers have compared the epigenomes of cancer cells and normal cells, and they have observed distinct epigenetic marks associated with cancer. Some anticancer therapies are being developed that focus on these epigenetic modifications.</p>
<p class="indent" id="ben_9781319297145_az37IVfbuD">Similarly, researchers have mapped the genomic locations of histone modifications in different cell types. These studies have detected specific histone modifications associated with promoters and enhancers of active genes. In one study, researchers mapped nine different epigenetic marks in nine different types of human cells. They were able to determine how the marks varied across cell types and to compare the marks associated with active and repressed genes. Because specific epigenetic marks are often associated with regulatory elements such as promoters and enhancers, researchers have used the presence of these marks to map the locations of these regulatory elements throughout the genome.</p>
<p class="indent" id="ben_9781319297145_oTSN1UkBGc">The ability to map epigenetic modifications has allowed researchers to look for associations between the presence of epigenetic changes at specific locations and the presence of individual phenotypes. For example, one might look to see whether epigenetic modifications at specific loci are associated with diabetes, with the goal of identifying epigenetic changes that contribute to the disease. These types of studies are called <dfn class="keyword" epub:type="keyword" id="ben_9781319297145_qRi32o8GNv"><a class="glossref" epub:type="glossref" href="pie_9781319216801_BM_glossary.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_NSE3K8ZTgE" id="ben_9781319297145_2BDBMidmGm" role="doc-glossref">epigenome-wide association studies (EWAS)</a></dfn> and are analogous to genome-wide association studies (GWAS, discussed in <a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch07_01.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_pnbkjQ3xot" id="ben_9781319297145_pxJDiBIvjA">Chapters 7</a> and <a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch20_01.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_2c5H8e27UU" id="ben_9781319297145_wJRwPSQAET">20</a>). One problem with EWAS research is that the epigenome potentially changes over an individual’s lifetime and may be influenced by environmental factors. Thus, it is difficult to know whether epigenetic changes associated with a phenotype cause the phenotype or are caused <i class="semantic-i" id="ben_9781319297145_n9XyamPQAj">by</i> the phenotype, an effect known as reverse causation. For example, one might detect a statistical association between the presence of a disease (say, high blood pressure) and an epigenetic modification at a specific locus. This might indicate that the epigenetic modification contributes to high blood pressure, but it is also possible that high blood pressure causes the epigenetic modification.</p>
<p class="indent" id="ben_9781319297145_hxvTmtHfk0">Recent advances have made it possible to detect and measure genome-wide epigenetic modifications within single cells, similar to the ability to sequence DNA and RNA in single cells (see <a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch20_01.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_2c5H8e27UU" id="ben_9781319297145_gdWMzTkHmt">Chapter 20</a>). With single-cell epigenomics, researchers study how different cell types vary in the presence of specific epigenetic changes, such as DNA methylation and histone modification. Single-cell epigenomics is being coupled with single-cell DNA sequencing and single-cell RNA sequencing to create triple-omics, which provides information about DNA variation, the alteration of chromatin structure, and gene expression.</p>
</section>
<section class="sect3" id="ben_9781319297145_1dimzQ9K3w">
<header id="ben_9781319297145_mruATyOxJW"><h3 class="c-head cap v2" id="ben_9781319297145_LbPdcKMKzR">Ancient Epigenomes</h3></header>
<p class="noindent" id="ben_9781319297145_BI4GRDPIU6">Neanderthals and Denisovans are two species of hominid that went extinct some 30,000 to 40,000 years ago (see the introduction to <a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch10_01.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_xua4LZ2D44" id="ben_9781319297145_TwLoepiWtA">Chapter 10</a>). In recent years, DNA has been isolated from their bones and sequenced, providing a detailed view of their genomes. Research now provides complementary information about their epigenomes.</p>
<p class="indent" id="ben_9781319297145_Enx0iqYEJo">Traditional methods of detecting DNA methylation, such as bisulfite sequencing, do not work well with ancient DNA because it is often present only in small amounts and is degraded. However, other methods, computational in nature, make it possible to identify regions of the DNA that were originally methylated. This is possible because, although DNA naturally decays after death, methylated and unmethylated cytosine bases do not decay in the same way. Unmethylated cytosine undergoes deamination to uracil (see <a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch18_03.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_yMkbTg9peo" id="ben_9781319297145_DZLMudXoiP">Section 18.2</a>), but methylated cytosine decays to thymine. These differences make it possible to determine the methylation status of the DNA prior to death. Before sequencing, uracil can be eliminated chemically, or a sequencing method that does not detect uracil can be used. Thus, those sites at which unmethylated cytosine has decayed to uracil are not read. Thymine, however, is read, so sites with methylated cytosine that decayed to thymine are read as thymine. This means that the ratio of thymine to cytosine bases that are read during sequencing will be higher in those regions of the DNA that were originally methylated than in regions that were not methylated.</p>
<p class="indent" id="ben_9781319297145_jGcdCPZ0zn">By using the ratio of thymine to cytosine bases read during sequencing of Neanderthal and Denisovan DNA, scientists have determined the DNA methylation patterns of their genomes. The methylation patterns of over 99% of the genomes of these ancient hominids were similar to those observed in modern humans; this is not unexpected, given <span aria-label="668" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page668" role="doc-pagebreak" title="668"/>the close evolutionary relationships of Neanderthals, Denisovans, and <i class="semantic-i" id="ben_9781319297145_2qRzMOLDY1">Homo sapiens</i>. However, there were a number of regions for which patterns of methylation differed among the species. One such region was in a group of five genes known as the <i class="semantic-i" id="ben_9781319297145_fKy63ulztB">HOXD</i> cluster, which is an important regulator of limb development in mammals. These results suggest that this cluster of genes may have played an important role in the limb development of modern humans. Other differences in methylation were seen in enhancers and in transcription-factor binding sites. In addition, differential methylation in modern humans was seen more often in genes related to diseases, particularly neurological and psychiatric disorders such as autism and schizophrenia. This observation suggests that the epigenetic changes in gene expression that have evolved in modern humans might have increased the risk of some human diseases.</p>
<aside class="case-study c3 main-flow v4" epub:type="case-study" id="ben_9781319297145_2uedRyKUX2" title="CONCEPTS">
<header id="ben_9781319297145_0xFWWNHMzg"><h4 class="title cap v4" epub:type="title" id="ben_9781319297145_2TZRa8HGJI">Concepts</h4></header>
<p class="noindent" id="ben_9781319297145_406xV8MdhO">The epigenome is the complete set of chromatin modifications in a genome. Research reveals that the epigenomes vary among cell types and among ancient hominids.</p>
</aside>
</section>
</section>
</body>
</html>