<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Chapter 1 Review in Chapter 1 Introduction to Genetics</title>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="final" name="process"/>
<meta content="3.1" name="schema"/>
<link href="../styles/pie_9781319216801.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1df703a4-880e-4fb4-a16f-bd0ab0744194" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body class="bodymatter" epub:type="bodymatter">
<section class="end-of-section" id="ben_9781319297145_5Pruwel4zx">
<header id="ben_9781319297145_HxxBrG2riY"><h2 class="title" epub:type="title" id="ben_9781319297145_xNpQFba3JK">Chapter 1 Review</h2></header>
<section class="summary" id="ben_9781319297145_sMRCjfGBtG">
<header id="ben_9781319297145_FLm6LQbFIG"><h3 class="title cap v1" epub:type="title" id="ben_9781319297145_bxv0tS0aoV">Chapter summary</h3></header>
<aside aria-label="Learning Objective" class="learning-objectives c3 main-flow v5" epub:type="learning-objectives" id="ben_9781319297145_ERVpEufuSL" title="Learning Objective">
<p class="noindent" id="ben_9781319297145_z1ybSl0SEp"><strong class="important" id="ben_9781319297145_A4VC8vRrJ1">Section 1.1 Learning Objective:</strong> Be able to explain the importance of genetics.</p>
</aside>
<ul class="ul-square" id="ben_9781319297145_P5N7Cnqx2Q">
<li id="ben_9781319297145_bgnwGKyUHH">Genetics is central to the life of every person: it influences a person’s physical features, personality, intelligence, and susceptibility to numerous diseases.</li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_rI6zV9wSQJ">Genetics plays important roles in agriculture, the pharmaceutical industry, and medicine. It is central to the study of biology.</li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_dnlqw3N084">All organisms use similar genetic systems. Genetic variation is the foundation of evolution and is critical to understanding all life.</li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_v3qnNThYwY">A tremendous amount of DNA exists in the biosphere. Scientists use environmental DNA to study and analyze biodiversity.</li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_xxkB9GzNM2">The study of genetics can be broadly divided into transmission genetics, molecular genetics, and population genetics.</li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_r7gSdnvwzc">Model genetic organisms are species about which much genetic information exists because they have characteristics that make them particularly amenable to genetic analysis.</li>
</ul>
<aside aria-label="Learning Objective" class="learning-objectives c3 main-flow v5" epub:type="learning-objectives" id="ben_9781319297145_w7lcMYRilB" title="Learning Objective">
<p class="noindent" id="ben_9781319297145_s7WrMgCjRp"><strong class="important" id="ben_9781319297145_4AOGdXm7K0">Section 1.2 Learning Objective:</strong> Be able to describe the history of genetics.</p>
</aside>
<ul class="ul-square" id="ben_9781319297145_XlZT2ZMIoL">
<li id="ben_9781319297145_pQ2KaTLpGw">The use of genetics by humans began with the domestication of plants and animals.</li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_lLeJHwTfyo">Ancient Greeks developed the concepts of pangenesis and the inheritance of acquired characteristics, both of which were later disproved. Ancient Romans developed practical measures for the breeding of plants and animals.</li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_ck7VdGICYm">Preformationism suggested that a person inherits all of his or her traits from one parent. Blending inheritance proposed that offspring possess a mixture of the parental traits. These ideas were later shown to be incorrect.</li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_4uvGAN7D5U"><span aria-label="14" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page14" role="doc-pagebreak" title="14"/>By studying the offspring of crosses between varieties of peas, Gregor Mendel discovered the principles of heredity. Developments in cytology in the nineteenth century led to the understanding that the cell nucleus is the site of heredity.</li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_Mw1OeMGPL6">In 1900, Mendel’s principles of heredity were rediscovered. Population genetics was established in the early 1930s, followed by bacterial and viral genetics. The structure of DNA was discovered in 1953, stimulating the rise of molecular genetics.</li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_G7KA8EjH63">The first human whole-genome sequence was completed in 2003.</li>
</ul>
<aside aria-label="Learning Objective" class="learning-objectives c3 main-flow v5" epub:type="learning-objectives" id="ben_9781319297145_KI0T2qQ8It" title="Learning Objective">
<p class="noindent" id="ben_9781319297145_YPJdcfTTg1"><strong class="important" id="ben_9781319297145_Asrsgxku7w">Section 1.3 Learning Objective:</strong> Be able to explain basic concepts of heredity.</p>
</aside>
<ul class="ul-square" id="ben_9781319297145_406BJD6Hlo">
<li id="ben_9781319297145_w8GRIqX6Xt">There are two basic types of cells: prokaryotic and eukaryotic.</li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_lZ0F3SR7d5">The set of alleles that determines a trait is termed the genotype; the trait that they produce is the phenotype.</li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_GVAMZxiH48">Genes are located on chromosomes, which are made up of nucleic acids and proteins and are partitioned into daughter cells through the process of mitosis or meiosis.</li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_IL7s51l9kp">Genetic information is expressed through the transfer of information from DNA to RNA to proteins.</li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_9O6eKEz17r">Evolution requires genetic change in populations.</li>
</ul>
</section>
<section class="learning-resources v1" epub:type="learning-resources" id="ben_9781319297145_my4Qha7tsK">
<header id="ben_9781319297145_IPCpkas8aB"><h3 class="title cap v1" epub:type="title" id="ben_9781319297145_6innvsoWCU">Important terms</h3></header>
<ul class="ul-no-mark" id="ben_9781319297145_yR9cmKgRKu">
<li id="ben_9781319297145_usgahTLhua"><a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch01_01.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_D5jfLavuyF" id="ben_9781319297145_M1q6VDLhUp">genetics</a></li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_lLr8MqgZCa"><a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch01_02.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_7aOxNukgXH" id="ben_9781319297145_tbYfHeBNFc">genome</a></li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_gG12H60DRi"><a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch01_02.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_cB2SUqJLG3" id="ben_9781319297145_zzwVIiAIYq">transmission genetics</a></li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_dmeUgbDKYh"><a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch01_02.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_apbLjLTu2Y" id="ben_9781319297145_CxbiIejZ0f">molecular genetics</a></li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_ZcIUateD7Y"><a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch01_02.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_ZjxyBeQbge" id="ben_9781319297145_dtpPyu2Hl6">population genetics</a></li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_3PfagBYNM3"><a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch01_02.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_3Um0GNarL6" id="ben_9781319297145_zbhi1BdUjm">model genetic organism</a></li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_wAdzDJIWjO"><a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch01_03.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_JYrtNcjl4R" id="ben_9781319297145_McduLJw8e9">pangenesis</a></li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_50qDZCLGnx"><a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch01_03.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_YBIMd4KU2h" id="ben_9781319297145_QHYy93cf66">inheritance of acquired characteristics</a></li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_tC4xQWxm7R"><a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch01_03.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_DlfYKFTCld" id="ben_9781319297145_EFgJR5Ja9A">preformationism</a></li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_xB8lyFOfVh"><a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch01_03.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_T5IOkYQIR2" id="ben_9781319297145_7QBHg2wtmD">blending inheritance</a></li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_EY86tK1OgE"><a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch01_03.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_GeS2Z6RG4c" id="ben_9781319297145_UBG58r4iyL">cell theory</a></li>
<li id="ben_9781319297145_IR1qjnE83o"><a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch01_03.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_zeU663DxpZ" id="ben_9781319297145_9Pn6v93Bso">germ-plasm theory</a></li>
</ul>
</section>
<section class="learning-resources v1" epub:type="learning-resources" id="ben_9781319297145_dAyRW5K58o">
<header id="ben_9781319297145_yNvaunwinG"><h3 class="title cap v1" epub:type="title" id="ben_9781319297145_Gsks4FO99z">Answers to concept checks</h3></header>
<ol class="numbered-list" id="ben_9781319297145_Y3qJ7ITK3N">
<li class="answer noindent" epub:type="answer" id="ben_9781319297145_c8zepVTMcI">d</li>
<li class="answer noindent" epub:type="answer" id="ben_9781319297145_ckNmilPGmR">No, because horses are expensive to house, feed, and propagate; they have too few progeny; and their generation time is too long.</li>
<li class="answer noindent" epub:type="answer" id="ben_9781319297145_Rbv905XlDl">Developments in cytology in the 1800s led to the identification of parts of the cell, including the cell nucleus and chromosomes. The cell theory focused biologists’ attention on the cell, eventually leading to the conclusion that the nucleus contains the hereditary information.</li>
</ol>
</section>
</section>
</body>
</html>