<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>7.5 Recombination Rates Exhibit Extensive Variation in Chapter 7 Linkage, Recombination, and Eukaryotic Gene Mapping</title>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="final" name="process"/>
<meta content="3.1" name="schema"/>
<link href="../styles/pie_9781319216801.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1df703a4-880e-4fb4-a16f-bd0ab0744194" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body class="bodymatter" epub:type="bodymatter">
<section class="sect1" id="ben_9781319297145_you3uxZYEn">
<header id="ben_9781319297145_h07laWXsOz"><h2 class="a-head v2" id="ben_9781319297145_FlbLbD1Uh4"><span class="ordinal" epub:type="ordinal" id="ben_9781319297145_HrnxRpMHZh">7.5 </span>Recombination Rates Exhibit Extensive Variation</h2></header>
<p class="noindent" id="ben_9781319297145_Ejv2TytlWM">Geneticists have studied variation in rates of recombination and have found that they vary widely—among species, among and along chromosomes of a single species, and even between males and females of the same species. For example, about twice as much recombination takes place in humans as in mice and rats. Within the human genome, recombination rates vary among chromosomes, with chromosomes 21 and 22 having the highest rates and chromosomes 2 and 4 having the lowest rates. Researchers have also detected differences between male and female humans in rates of recombination: the autosomal chromosomes of females undergo about 50% more recombination than do the autosomal chromosomes of males.</p>
<p class="indent" id="ben_9781319297145_KmjDoMMirr">Geneticists have found numerous recombination <i class="semantic-i" id="ben_9781319297145_5Fgafqda4l">hotspots</i>, where recombination is at least 10 times as high as the average elsewhere in the genome. The human genome contains an estimated 25,000 to 50,000 such recombination hotspots, and approximately 60% of all crossovers take place in them. For humans, recombination hotspots tend to be found near, but not within, active genes. Recombination hotspots have been detected in the genomes of other organisms as well. Other chromosomal regions, such as those near centromeres, often display reduced rates of recombination.</p>
<aside class="case-study c3 main-flow v4" epub:type="case-study" id="ben_9781319297145_KP26uVpIsd" title="CONCEPTS">
<header id="ben_9781319297145_Jgx5TUHjIF"><h3 class="title v4 cap" epub:type="title" id="ben_9781319297145_c3Q8LzDVn2">Concepts</h3></header>
<p class="noindent" id="ben_9781319297145_VTRbCuUMI3">Rates of recombination vary among species, among and along chromosomes, and even between males and females.</p>
</aside>
</section>
</body>
</html>