<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>17.1 Eukaryotic Cells and Bacteria Share Many Features of Gene Regulation but Differ in Several Important Ways in Chapter 17 Control of Gene Expression in Eukaryotes</title>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="final" name="process"/>
<meta content="3.1" name="schema"/>
<link href="../styles/pie_9781319216801.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1df703a4-880e-4fb4-a16f-bd0ab0744194" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body class="bodymatter" epub:type="bodymatter">
<section class="sect1" id="ben_9781319297145_ntrWr4YSdd">
<header id="ben_9781319297145_1BGXs1Hxcz"><h2 class="a-head v2" id="ben_9781319297145_powd4UnVsF"><span class="ordinal" epub:type="ordinal" id="ben_9781319297145_yVPhlN62ru">17.1 </span>Eukaryotic Cells and Bacteria Share Many Features of Gene Regulation but Differ in Several Important Ways</h2></header>
<p class="noindent" id="ben_9781319297145_lgTCjZSMDj">As discussed in <a class="crossref" href="pie_9781319216801_ch16_01.xhtml#ben_9781319297145_TNK2N04MLy" id="ben_9781319297145_PxzvUywNs7">Chapter 16</a>, many features of gene regulation are shared by bacterial and eukaryotic cells. For example, in both types of cells, DNA-binding proteins influence the ability of RNA polymerase to initiate transcription. However, there are also some differences. First, many bacterial and archaeal genes are organized into operons and are transcribed into a single RNA molecule. Although some operon-like gene clusters have been found in worms and even in some <span aria-label="503" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page503" role="doc-pagebreak" title="503"/>primitive chordates, most eukaryotic genes have their own promoters and are transcribed separately. Second, chromatin structure affects gene expression in eukaryotic cells; DNA must unwind from the histone proteins before transcription can take place. Third, the presence of the nuclear membrane in eukaryotic cells separates transcription and translation in time and space. Therefore, the regulation of gene expression in eukaryotic cells is characterized by a greater diversity of mechanisms that act at different points in the transfer of information from DNA to protein.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>